# xbox_shrinker
This program will remove (scrub) the random padding found in (OG) xbox iso file. The iso files need to be in redump format.
The scrubbed iso is still fully functional and can be used in emulators etc. Compressed scrubbed isos are usually several GB smaller than the unscrubbed counterparts.
The program also supports unscrubbing of the iso and reconstruction of the original file.

# Credits
* [LedZeppelin68](https://github.com/LedZeppelin68/dvd-shrinker) for his dvd_shrinker program. This is actually a heavily modified version of his program. Especially his implementation of the seed brute-forcer was very helpful!
* [XboxDev](https://github.com/XboxDev/extract-xiso) for extract_xiso. Parts were used for the analysis of the iso layout.

# On the random padding
Random padding data is generated by a cryptographic function that generates a stream of random bytes with the use of a seed value. This stream of random data is written to the unused areas of the game partition. Random data has a compression ratio of 0%. Therefore, less gamedata generally means worse overall compression, whereas in scrubbed images the opposite is true.

If the seed value for the random stream is known, the random padding data can be reconstructed.

Early xbox games used a (proprietary) stream algorithm, that uses a 32-Bit seed. This seed can easily be brute-forced in less than a minute. Unfortunately, Microsoft decided later to change the stream algorithm to rc4-drop-2048 with a seed size of 128-Bits, which is too large to brute-force.

# Handling of rc4 stream games

For games that use the rc4 algorithm for padding, the random stream is separated from the iso and saved to a .rc4 file. This file is needed if you want to reconstruct the scrubbed iso to the original iso.

The idea is to store the rc4 stream files to a (maybe less expensive) cold storate and keep the scrubbed isos for everyday use. For games that use the proprietary Microsoft algorithm, no rc4 stream file is created. Reconstruction is possible with the 32-Bit seed.

# Features
Improvements over LedZeppelin68's dvd-shrinker
* for the scrubbing process, the ss.xml is *optional* (lack of ss.xml will increase processing time)
* speed improvement for scrubbing process when ss.xml is used (due to new algorithm)
* for the unscrubbing process, the ss.xml is *not used*

new features
* supports scrubbing of **all** iso files
* supports unscrubbing of **all** iso.dec files (rc4 stream games need a .rc4 file present, created at scrubbing process)
* Entries not found in ss.xml are added automatically

planned features
* Support for xbox360 isos

## Requirements
On Windows you need to have Microsoft .Net installed.  
On Linux you need to have mono installed.

## Usage
**Scrubbing:**
```
xbox_shrinker.exe <.iso file>
```
**Unscrubbing:**
```
xbox_shrinker.exe <.iso.dec file>
```
When unscrubbing a rc4 stream game named `gamename.iso.dec`, the program expects a .rc4 file names `gamename.rc4`.
Alternatively, you can specify the rc4 file specifically using
```
xbox_shrinker.exe <.iso.dec file> <.rc4 file>
```
On Linux the commands need to be prepended by `mono`
